Feat: guide to trigger workflows (#111)
libremfg/libremfg.github.io: content/how-to/bpmn/trigger-workflow.md

---
title: 'Trigger workflows'
date: '2024-04-24T19:35:09+03:00'
categories: ["how-to"]
description: How to Trigger Workflow
weight: 150
menu:
  main:
    parent: howto-bpmn
    identifier:
---

You also have multiple ways to start, or _trigger_, a BPMN workflow.
The best choice of trigger depends on the context of the event and the system that initiates the workflow.

{{% reusable/bpmn-triggers %}}

## Start a workflow from an API

When a workflow has the default start event, trigger it through an API call.
For example, an API trigger may originate from a custom frontend application or a developer's local machine.

### Synchronous and asynchronous API triggers

To start BPMN workflows, Rhize has two API operations:
- `createAndRunBPMNSync` starts a workflow and waits for the process to complete or abort (synchronous).
- `createAndRunBpmn` starts a workflow and does not wait for the response (asynchronous).

> The synchronous call does not execute further operations until it receives a response from the Rhize server.

Author: ```suggestion
Use the synchronous operation if you want to receive information about the result of the workflow in the call response.
```

On the other hand, the asynchronous operation frees up the call system to do more work, no matter whether the workflow runs correctly.

The call syntax for the each operation is almost identical.
For example, compare the syntax for these calls:

> {{% tabs %}}
> {{% tab "Synchronous" %}}
> ```gql
> mutation SynchronousCall($createAndRunBpmnSyncId: String!, $version: String ) {
>   createAndRunBpmnSync(id: $createAndRunBpmnSyncId, version: $version) {
>     id
>     jobState
>     customResponse
>   }
> }
> ```
> {{% /tab %}}
> 
> {{% tab "Async" %}}
> ```gql
> mutation AsyncCall{
>   createAndRunBPMNSync{

Author: ```suggestion
{{% tabs %}}
{{% tab "Synchronous" %}}
```gql
mutation SynchronousCall($createAndRunBpmnSyncId: String!, $version: String ) {
  createAndRunBpmnSync(id: $createAndRunBpmnSyncId, version: $version) {
    id
    jobState
    customResponse
  }
}
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Async" %}}
```gql
mutation SynchronousCall{
  createAndRunBpmn(id: "API_demo_custom_response") {
    id
    jobState
    customResponse
  }
}
```

> mutation AsyncCall{
>   createAndRunBPMNSync{

Author: ```suggestion
mutation asyncCall{
  createAndRunBpmn(id: "API_demo_custom_response") {
    id
    jobState
    customResponse
  }
}
```

>     id
>     jobState
>     customResponse
>   }
> }

Author: ```suggestion
```

Functionally, only the last value of the `customResponse` is returned to the client that sent the response.
However, you can use conditional branches and different end nodes to add error handling.

For example, this workflow returns `Workflow ran correctly` if the call variables include the message `CORRECT` and an error message in all other cases.

<!-- vale off -->
{{< bigFigure
src="/images/bpmn/screenshot-rhize-bpmn-error-handling-custom-response.png"
alt="A BPMN workflow with customResponse in the output of the end node"
caption="Download this workflow from [BPMN templates](https://github.com/libremfg/bpmn-templates/)"
width="80%"
>}}
<!-- vale on -->

### Additional properties for workflow calls {#variables-versions}

API operations can also include parameters to add variables to the {{< abbr "process variable context" >}} and to specify a workflow version.

To add variables, use the `variables` input argument.
Note that the variables are accessible from their root object.
For example, a workflow would access the following string value at `$.input.message`:

```gql{
"variables": "{\"input\":{\"message\":\"CORRECT\"}}"
}
```

> To specify a version, use the `version` property. For example, this input specifies that Rhize run version `3` of the `API_demoCallToRemoteAPI` workflow:

Author: ```suggestion
To specify a version, use the `version` property. For example, this input instructs Rhize to run version `3` of the `API_demoCallToRemoteAPI` workflow:
```

```json
{
  "createAndRunBpmnSyncId": "API_demoCallToRemoteAPI",
  "version": "3"
}
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

If the `version` property is empty, Rhize runs the active version of the workflow (if one exists).

---
title: 'Trigger workflows'
date: '2024-04-24T19:35:09+03:00'
categories: ["how-to"]
description: How to Trigger Workflow
weight: 150
menu:
  main:
    parent: howto-bpmn
    identifier:
---

You also have multiple ways to start, or _trigger_, a BPMN workflow.
The best choice of trigger depends on the context of the event and the system that initiates the workflow.

{{% reusable/bpmn-triggers %}}

## Start a workflow from an API

When a workflow has the default start event, trigger it through an API call.
For example, an API trigger may originate from a custom frontend application or a developer's local machine.

### Synchronous and asynchronous API triggers

To start BPMN workflows, Rhize has two API operations:
- `createAndRunBPMNSync` starts a workflow and waits for the process to complete or abort (synchronous).
- `createAndRunBpmn` starts a workflow and does not wait for the response (asynchronous).

> The synchronous call does not execute further operations until it receives a response from the Rhize server.

Author: > s. For an Async BPMN call you would need to read the JobResponse from NATS or set up storeJobResponse correctly.

This is a really good point, but I don't want to make this particular guide too complex. However I have an issue  to create a guide to debug and error handle BPMNs, and this made me realize I need to put information about inspecting the workflow state through API there.

https://github.com/libremfg/libremfg.github.io/issues/103

> The synchronous call offers slightly better debugging and does not execute further operations until it receives a response from the Rhize server.

Author: ```suggestion
The synchronous call does not execute further operations until it receives a response from the Rhize server.
```

On the other hand, the asynchronous operation frees up the call system to do more work, no matter whether the workflow runs correctly.

> The call syntax for the each operation is almost identical.

Author: ```suggestion
Both operations have  similar call syntax.
```

For example, compare the syntax for these calls:

{{% tabs %}}
{{% tab "Synchronous" %}}
```gql
mutation SynchronousCall($createAndRunBpmnSyncId: String!, $version: String ) {
  createAndRunBpmnSync(id: $createAndRunBpmnSyncId, version: $version) {
    id
    jobState
    customResponse
  }
}
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Async" %}}
```gql
mutation AsyncCall{

>   createAndRunBPMNSync{

Author: > "each operation is almost identical

More about the call syntax, but I'm going to make it more explicit.

> The call syntax for both operations are similar.

>   createAndRunBPMNSync{

Reviewer: I actually had no issue with the text above, just the missing arguments in this mutation.

    id
    jobState
    customResponse
  }
}
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

The responses for these calls have two differences:

> - For synchronous calls, the returned `JobState` should be a finished value (such as `COMPLETED` or `ABORTED`). For asynchronous calls, the status is likely in progress.  a different value for synchronous calls.

Author: ```suggestion
- For synchronous calls, the returned `JobState` should be a finished value (such as `COMPLETED` or `ABORTED`). Asynchronous calls likely return an in-progress status, such as `RUNNING`.
```

- Only the synchronous call receives data in the `customResponse`. For details, refer to the next section.

### `CustomResponse`

The `customResponse` is a special variable to return data in the response to clients that run `createAndRunBPMNSync` operations.

You can set the `customResponse` in any [element]({{< relref "/how-to/bpmn/bpmn-elements" >}}) that has an `Output` or `Input response` parameter.
It can use any data from the {{< abbr "process variable context" >}}, including variables added on the fly.

> Its format can use JSON or JSONata.

Reviewer: The format will always be JSON. Some part of the process must create a variable in the context called `customResponse` and that variable is returned as a JSON string.

> Its format can use JSON or JSONata.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Functionally, only the last value of the `CustomResponse` is returned to the client that sent the response.

Author: ```suggestion
Functionally, only the last value of the `customResponse` is returned to the client that sent the response.
```

However, you can use conditional branches and different end nodes to add error handling.

For example, this workflow returns `Workflow ran correctly` if the call variables include the message `CORRECT` and an error message in all other cases.

<!-- vale off -->
{{< bigFigure
src="/images/bpmn/screenshot-rhize-bpmn-error-handling-custom-response.png"
alt="A BPMN workflow with customResponse in the output of the end node"
caption="Download this workflow from [BPMN templates](https://github.com/libremfg/bpmn-templates/)"
width="80%"
>}}
<!-- vale on -->

### Additional properties for workflow calls {#variables-versions}

API operations can also include parameters to add variables to the {{< abbr "process variable context" >}} and to specify a workflow version.

To add variables, use the `variables` input argument.
Note that the variables are accessible from their root object.
For example, a workflow would access the following string value at `$.input.message`:

```gql{
"variables": "{\"input\":{\"message\":\"CORRECT\"}}"
}
```

> To specify a version, use the `version` property. For example, this input specifies that Rhize run version `3` of the `API_demoCallToRemoteAPI` workflow:

Reviewer: Probably worth adding that if no version is specified the "active version" (if any) is executed.

```json
{
  "createAndRunBpmnSyncId": "API_demoCallToRemoteAPI",
  "version": "3"
}
```

## Start from a message

The [message start event]({{< relref "/how-to/bpmn/bpmn-elements#message-start-event" >}}) subscribes to a topic on the Rhize broker.
Whenever a message is published to this topic, the workflow is triggered.

> The Rhize broker can receive messages in MQTT, NATS, and OPC UA.

Author: ```suggestion
The Rhize broker can receive messages published over MQTT, NATS, and OPC UA.
```

For example, this workflow subscribes to the topic `material/stuff`.
Whenever a message is published to the topic, it evaluates whether the quantity is in the correct threshold.
If the quantity is correct, it uses the [mutation service task]({{< relref "/how-to/bpmn/bpmn-elements#graphql-mutation/" >}}) to add a material lot.
If incorrect, it sends an alert back to the broker.

<!-- vale off -->
{{% bigFigure 
alt="BPMN message start with conditional evaluation"
src="/images/bpmn/rhize-bpmn-message-start-throw-conditional.png"
width="65%"
caption="Download this workflow as a [BPMN template](https://github.com/libremfg/bpmn-templates/tree/main/msg-start-and-throw)."
 %}}
<!-- vale on -->

> Note that, for a workflow to run from a message start event, the workflow **must be enabled.**

Reviewer: Not sure if you want to go to this level of detail but there are two things:
1. The workflow needs an active version.
2. The WorkflowMessage of that active version needs to be enabled.

Author: I just checked and I think the UI does not permit the User to enable a workflow if it's not active, so for now I'm going to leave that part out. Of course we can add it back in if users complain.

menu:
  main:
    parent: howto-bpmn
    identifier:
---

You also have multiple ways to start, or _trigger_, a BPMN workflow.
The best choice of trigger depends on the context of the event and the system that initiates the workflow.

{{% reusable/bpmn-triggers %}}

## Start a workflow from an API

When a workflow has the default start event, trigger it through an API call.
For example, an API trigger may originate from a custom frontend application or a developer's local machine.

### Synchronous and asynchronous API triggers

To start BPMN workflows, Rhize has two API operations:
- `createAndRunBPMNSync` starts a workflow and waits for the process to complete or abort (synchronous).
- `createAndRunBpmn` starts a workflow and does not wait for the response (asynchronous).

Use the synchronous operation if you want to receive information about the result of the workflow in the call response.
On the other hand, the asynchronous operation frees up the call system to do more work, no matter whether the workflow runs correctly.

The call syntax for the each operation is almost identical.
For example, compare the syntax for these calls:

{{% tabs %}}
{{% tab "Synchronous" %}}
```gql

> mutation SynchronousCall($createAndRunBpmnSyncId: String!, $version: String ) {
>   createAndRunBpmnSync(id: $createAndRunBpmnSyncId, version: $version) {
>     id
>     jobState
>     customResponse
>   }
> }

Author: ```suggestion
mutation sychronousCall{
  createAndRunBpmnSync(id: "API_demo_custom_response") {
    id
    jobState
    customResponse
  }
}

```
